---
layout: narrative
title: Punchline
author:
editor: 
source:
---


Deen Dayal @ Deenu was born in July 1970 to Shobha Devi in the shade of a willow tree amidst rice fields as she was replanting rice saplings, two weeks premature. His father, Purshottam, had gone away at the beginning of the monsoon to Kinnaur to cut timber for a saw-mill, and only saw his child when he returned for the rice harvest.
Like most premature babies (and many full term babies) of that era, Deenu wasn’t expected to survive long – his grandmother though believed he was a reincarnation of her husband (who had passed away the past winter) and took painstaking care of him, ensuring that he would long outlive her.

They lived in a large three-room house well away from other houses in the village. The two-storied stone structure with its large *aangan* housed livestock below and the humans on top, and had a low-roofed attic for storage. Much of Shobha’s time and effort went into taking care of her older daughters, aged 2 and 3, as well as their animals: cows, bulls, goats, sheep, chickens and roosters. Purshottam didn’t have regular employment, but was a hard worker and a hard drinker; every night he’d be very cheerful after his first glass of home distilled liquor, with every subsequent glass decreasing his cheer and increasing his violence. Also living in the house were Deenu’s two uncles, their wives and six children.

The first noticeable sign that Deenu was different from other children was that he wouldn’t turn his head in response to sounds that others made. A difficulty in speech also became evident soon. This aroused displeasure in his father, who routinely abused the child verbally, and started lavishing more of his attention on Deenu’s younger brother, Raju, who was a year younger than Deenu was. By the time he was five, Deenu was capable of doing many household chores and would often go with his older cousins to graze their livestock. He was not very communicative, except with his grandmother whom he still spent a lot of time with, especially in the mornings and evenings as she did her chores, including sweeping out the house and its *aangan*, as well as the rooms where the cattle and goats/sheep were kept. By and large his early childhood was spent in the company of his immediate family and their animals.

Deenu started going to school at age 8, at the same time as his brother. He had a torrid time there – the schoolmasters were not tolerant of his inability to follow their instructions and beat him many times every day; his schoolmates continually made fun of his incommunicative and slow nature in increasingly cruel ways. Matters in school were not helped by the fact that Raju was a quick learner, and comparisons were often made between the both of them. Influenced perhaps by his father’s attitude, Raju often played a part in the ridicule inflicted on Deenu. It was when a schoolmaster suggested to Purshottam that the “defects” could be beaten out of Deenu that he started getting beaten at home as well. Because his grandmother strongly objected to this treatment, his father was sly about the physical abuse, hitting him hard on the back of the head when his grandmother wasn’t looking.
 
When he was 10 years old, Deenu’s grandmother fell off a tree she was cropping for fodder and died soon after. He stopped climbing trees that day. He also stopped going to school, as it became his duty to graze the animals during the day. His old school-fellows continued their habit of baiting him whenever they came across him. His father, when at home, increased his physical abuse and his uncle started beating him too. Deenu started sleeping in the attic where his father and uncle couldn’t get at him after getting drunk. To this day, he can only sleep well in an attic.

When Deenu was 18, Raju joined the Army as a jawan. When he came home for his vacation, he completely ignored Deenu. His sisters were already married by then and came back home rarely. Deenu now spent most of his time in the fields, or taking care of the cattle, rarely interacting with even his closest family. People started noticing that he now mumbled a lot to himself, and made strange gestures with his hands.

Purshottam didn’t come back from his saw-mill sojourn in 1991. His uncles turned Deenu and his mother out of their house and they started living in a nearby outhouse that was quite ramshackle. It was dampness during the monsoon followed by the cold of winter that probably brought on a lung disease that caused Shobha’s death. Raju was shocked when he returned for his next vacation, but aided by a large cash settlement from his uncles in exchange for his land rights, he moved away from the area and built a house in the city.

Deenu was left alone and with no support system. He lived in the jungle, ate what little he could forage and would surely have died were it not for a group of women who found him sitting at the foot of a tree babbling incoherently. They tried talking to him – he kept covering his face and wouldn’t respond, but he followed them back towards the village. When they reached the temple, they asked the priest to take care of him – he refused. While Deenu lived near the temple for a few days, with some people bringing him food, his situation became more widely known. A retired schoolmaster, Anil, feeling regret for what had transpired in school many years ago, started visiting Deenu on his daily walks, and one day convinced him to come home with him. Deenu spent the night in the aangan of Anil’s house. Anil gave him a broom in the morning, and Deenu started sweeping, first the aangan and then the market road in front of the house. In the afternoon, he brought fodder for Anil’s cows, and pine needles for the cowshed floor. And in the evening, he ate in the *aangan* and went to sleep in the attic.

<p align="center">
 --x--
</p>

Twenty years have passed, and Deenu’s life has become routine, his white-bearded screwy-eyed stooping figure almost a fixture in the marketplace. He walks around with his broom, mumbling and diligently sweeping leaves and detritus off the street. His old tormentors have come to accept his presence peacefully, except for one man who tries, every time that he is drunk and riding his scooter through the market, to knock Deenu’s woolen cap off his head. He goes every afternoon into the forest and returns with a large *bhoja*: fodder or firewood or pine-needles or maybe plastic waste. He still does not climb trees, although sometimes he goes near his old home and sits there awhile. His sisters come occasionally from their somewhat distant homes; they remain very fond of him and perhaps regret that their familial responsibilities prevent them from taking better care of him. When they visit, he sits with them at the temple, gently nodding or shaking his head as they speak. 

The world around them has changed, there has been an influx of *xenos* seeking solace and escape from the dead-end that living in a city now engenders. Buildings are replacing fields, and commerce is slowly taking sway. Deenu’s uncles decide that it is in their best interest to establish documentary control over the family lands, and approach the Tehsildar to entrust Deenu’s share to them owing to his mental incapacity. The Tehsildar, suitably lubricated, seems amenable to giving effect to this arrangement, provided they can have it attested in his court.

Early one morning Deenu’s uncles inject him with a tranquilizer and force him into a car that takes them to the court in Baijnath. However, despite the mildness of the dose, Deenu remains unconscious for a long time, and on regaining consciousness is completely unresponsive, breathing slowly and staring vacantly. While the uncles are negotiating the modalities of the attestation, the Tehsildar is called away on urgent business and asks them to return on the morrow.

Deenu’s sister has chosen the same morning to visit her brother. Her surprise at Deenu’s absence gradually turns to shock as she hears the tea shop owner’s words of witness. She sits alone at the temple and weeps, praying to whatever it may be that is almighty that her brother remain safe and protected.

<p align="center">
 --x--
</p>

It is now late at night and Deenu has not yet shifted or been shifted from the car he has been in all day. It stands in the aangan of his ancestors’ house, and when his oldest uncle comes out to lock the gate, he is surprised to find Deenu sitting upright, looking straight-eyed at him. As he approaches, the car door opens and Deenu, in a deep voice that the uncle has not heard in many years, says “Chintu, what is it that you have learnt? The land was not mine, and is not yours or Deenu’s – it is in our destiny to possess it and use it, but not to dispose of it. That is only in the hands of a greater power than us, and we live under that power trying to seek our happiness in this world”. The uncle has only ever been called ‘Chintu’ by his father, and falls into a swoon.

The next morning, his family come out of the house to see Deenu sleeping inside the car, and the uncle passed out outside. They revive the uncle, who without saying a word drives the car to the marketplace and leaves Deenu there. When Deenu wakes up, he searches for his broom and continues his simple life, eating and sleeping well.
