---
layout: narrative
title: An Arabian Night
author:
editor: 
source:
---

I’m sitting at the bar in an expensive Dubayy hotel. High ceiling, plate glass windows that overlook the lights of the city and the sea, a classy band playing numbers in a foreign language. The wine tastes sour, but I’m getting the hang of holding the glass by the stem, like I know what I’m doing. It all seems a dream since I boarded the flight in Calicut: missing the connection, floating politely through the airline apology lines, encountering vouchers and lifestyles that I think I can get used to.A beautiful lady in a jumpsuit walks through the doors and across the room towards me; I sit up straighter and try not to stare as she takes the seat next to mine. She runs her fingers through her dark hair, glancing briefly at me before looking into her phone.  I’m watching through the corner of my eye as she flicks her fingers over the screen, and then her thumb moves slightly, the phone goes dark and she’s turning towards me and I feel the redness climbing the back of my neck, my ears, my scalp heating up. I’m glad my hands are on the counter and that they have something to do; it’s as I’m picking up the wineglass that she speaks, a low clear electric voice that causes me to fumble badly.The bartender and waiter have quickly cleared the mess, there are two new drinks standing in front of us. “I prefer martinis,” she says, “I’m Swaati, by the way” and proceeds to effortlessly extract from me my backstory. This glass has a stem too, but it’s so much easier to drink what’s in it. She’s amused that I’m off to start my first job, and starts narrating the story of hers:“It was in Bangalore, right at the top of the dot com boom. Looking for a job I walked into an office where the new boss just returning from America frustrated with familial intrigues had fired all the employees retaining just the receptionist and the admin guy and so he said yes join now and start now. Soon we were whirling and twirling in a world of nine daily newspapers and events and clients and campaigns and productions and promotions…”She breaks off as the doors swing open and policemen walk in. There’s a flurry of activity around the room as people quickly start wearing masks and moving chairs away from each other. I too reach awkwardly into my pocket and am pulling on my mask, when I notice that Swaati has not moved, except to take a sip of her drink; a half-smile plays on her face as her eyes follow the policemen approaching the maître d’. There’s a short exchange of whispers and the policemen turn to leave, her smile gets broader as she catches the eye of the lead policeman, he shrugs sheepishly as he walks out.“So one day” she continues as if nothing has happened “the head honcho from Delhi arrived with news: Don Tattaglia sitting atop his liquor empire funded yachts and ponies and aeroplanes and racecars wants us to manage and maintain his image. Not unaware of his peculiarities and vulgarities, we decide to tread cautiously, like let’s not be overwhelmed, let’s meet him in an informal setting and gauge him, maybe we can invite him to office for a party or something?” “But we end up going to his party instead, five of us taking deep breaths in the elevator as it pulls up to the rooftop. The doors open, the only thing we see is the humongous red ruby in its gold setting nestling amidst this expanse of waxed chest and paunch; we just stand there, staring, and as the doors close my boss takes another deep breath and pressed the button. We all knew there was just no way we could make this look good”.				She’s laughing, I don’t join in because the band has just started playing a song I recognize. She’s still smiling as she finishes her drink with a large sip, looks up to nod at the bartender, and gets up and walks away, phone and bag in hand. She pauses to glance at me as she’s pushing the door open, and then she’s gone.The music is reaching familiar words. A feeling is rising from within; it’s now or never. I stand up, steady myself, put my mask in my pocket, gulp down my drink, leave all my vouchers on the counter and I’m through the doors as the crooning lady says I don’t need to be forgiven.
<p align="center">
 --x--
</p>

I’m thinking about Swaati and her story as the elevator doors close and open. It’s now or never: I walk through the lobby and out of the building. The blast of warm air makes me pause at the top of the steps; I look across the portico at her getting into the driver’s seat of a long low-slung Mercedes Benz. She turns to me, smiles and beckons. I smile too as I walk to the car and am doing my seatbelt up as she makes the roof disappear and thumbs the engine to life. “It’s always about establishing the power hierarchy in a space, you see”, she tells me, “like when the cops came in. We can’t show them that they have any power over us”. I give her a rose I’ve abstracted from an arrangement in the lobby, she’s pleased and tucks it behind her ear. We’re on a main road now, and there isn’t much traffic. A rolling samba beat at the push of a button, the car is going faster and the seat seems to be drawing me inward, enveloping me, hair in my forehead when she touches some buttons and suddenly I hear rushing, feel the wind tickling my scalp and my head becoming light. I look left and her hair is flowing free, lips parted, ecstasy in her brown eyes. This is infinity, I think, let this be where it all ends, and end it does, the car pulling to a halt in front of an all-night convenience store. “Hungry?” she asks. “This place stocks great sandwiches”. I’m not surprised that she doesn’t get out. I walk into the store and find I have enough money to buy three cellophane wrapped sandwiches. We eat them sitting in the car, watching the white surf appear and melt in the dark sea. The sandwich is nice, juicy and filling, and I’m glad that I’ve bought her dinner. We’ve been sitting awhile in silence, listening to the waves. I’m sensing that there’s something she has to say, but isn’t, and I’m wondering how to gracefully draw it out: I settle on the simple ‘what’s on your mind?’ but I’m still finding my voice when a sudden flick of her wrist sends the cellophane in her hand out into the night. She turns toward me and growls, she’s gunning the engine and there’s no space for words anymore, it’s infinity we’re tending to.<p align="center">
 --x--
</p>

She’s leading me into a beach-club. It’s almost empty, yet she seems to know everyone there. We take off our shoes and settle into two deck chairs; a lady brings us drinks and slippers, tells us to feel free to use these in the premises.“It’s only in India that we call them chappals” Swaati begins “otherwise they’re called flip-flops. mmm yummy” she sips her drink, and continues “This one time I was lounging like this in Goa and this random stranger just steps into my flip-flops and walks away. I didn’t feel like moving, so I just let it be, and he came back ten minutes later profusely apologetic he was preoccupied thinking about his new salon, when he got back he saw his chappals lying right there, he even wondered when he took mine why he’d parked them next to someone else in the first place, but please he said, there are two new masseurs would I like to come try them out?”. She pauses to sip, and I do too.“Two exquisite hours later we’re at a party in a fabulous beachhouse where all the prime chillers of Goa arrive dressed up, the host telling a story he’s got down pat, the artifices about his acquisition of the property, when there’s a sudden ruffling of the atmosphere: Mick Jagger has entered the building.” I’m in thrall, but there’s something about this drink that’s making me feel weird.“Everyone is flurried all eyes on him the host trying to continue his story as his wife is pulling on his arm, ridiculous. Empty wineglass, off to the bar…”I feel a fluidity in my gut.“…and up he walks “Hi, I'm Mick”. Conversation leads up common threads, stemming from media reports about storms surrounding letters with death threats: “Did you ever receive the letter?”, he asked, I said “No!” and he responded“Me neither!” “But you can sing!” I said and we laugh, our connection established, and when we look around, the party has entered a different realm.”I’m farting as she’s talking, it’s pungent and pervasive.“Now what? “I'll send you an email with my phone number” I offered “you can hit me up whenever you want to take this ahead” “Uh, I don’t have an email” and points to his coterie of women “You can get in touch with her and she’ll put you through to her and...” I’m just like bleh. Another drink.”I’ve got to go. I blindly put my feet into chappals and charge away towards a hut-like structure wondering whether there’d be a pan or a pot at my relief, which came soon in plush environs. I continue sitting a long while after I’m done, examining the chappals: pink rubber strap attached to a rubber sole white on top, pink below; almost exactly the same as but except for the colour different blue and white Hawaii chappals that were ubiquitous during my childhood. I hold my head in my hands. 

I realize I don’t have my wallet on me anymore. I wash up and walk out, and am assailed by a loud blast of music. Things outside are very different from what they were before. The tables are full of people, and many more people are walking around, laughing and talking over the music. Large ladies wearing gowns are occupying the deckchairs we were on, and there’s no footwear or Swaati in sight. I walk out through the doors and down a tree-lined driveway.

<p align="center">
 --x--
</p>

I am lost as I exit the gate. An unknown road lies all around: left and right, ahead and behind; it’s at least 80 feet wide and the buildings that flank it are at least 80 feet high, many much more. My phone has no network. I can’t for the life of me remember the name of the hotel I’m supposed to be at. Everything looks shut, no people to see. A car goes by, not pausing. 

I start walking. It is well lit, but there’s a haze that precludes me from making much out about things that are far away. I wander across the road and down an alley. It’s seediness startles me and I’m quickly back on the road again. I’m looking for something familiar, but everything seems the same, roads leading in and out with fast cars whirring by. The sky is slowly starting to lighten. There are people on the road now, they seem ghostly, expressionless. I sit down on the pavement and contemplate the patterns formed in its blocks. A low black car has stopped in front of me. I stand up and see Swaati. No words are needed. I get in, knowing my stuff is all in the boot. She’s driving me to the airport, her vacant eyes looking only at the road ahead. She gives me a hug and a peck on the cheek, and is gone.<p align="center">
 --x--
</p>

I awaken to the lights and sounds of an aircraft preparing to land. I’m groggy as I notice the multi-ethnic AI bot stewardesses bustling around ahead. A voice is droning “…hope you enjoyed the flight, and that the layover experience was everything you wanted it to be”.I’m jolted back in time to those first words Swaati spoke: “What do you want me to be?” she’d asked, setting in motion a train that I’d had little control over. My head is hurting as I lean back in my seat, and my feet feel cold. I look down and there’s a tingling down my spine as I register my pink slippers: they and only they keep me grounded, aware that my experience was in some senses real, closer to truth than the rupee-per-second mindtrips sold at the VR parlours.