---
layout: narrative
title: Fortunate Son
author:
editor: 
source:
---

Manohar Lal’s life-altering quirk began as a direct consequence of a conversation with Dhuni Chand, his oldest employee. 

They had known each other since early childhood, though they had never been close. Manohar Lal’s father, an impulsive man of capital and foresight, sensed opportunity in Nehru’s grand plans for a new capital for Punjab and moved there to set up a grocery store. Dhuni Chand’s father, a simple and honest man, accompanied him from the village as his first employee. The business did well, and Dhuni Chand joined it as its second employee soon after he was finished with school. Manohar Lal in his place attended university in Delhi and returned brimming with new ideas of socialism and justice, as also the more practical understanding that customers prefer to choose their shopping rather than wait for the shopkeeper and his staff to fetch it for them. Thus was founded Chandigarh’s first supermarket and its success brought happiness to both fathers, who retired and passed away happy men.

Increasing prosperity had not diminished Manohar Lal’s idealism regarding the inherent equality of all men, and, when the time came, he spoke to Dhuni Chand of his desire to finance the university education of the latter’s son. 
“If only you too had gone to college like I had” he said, “your life would have been totally different, you wouldn’t have had to join the same job that your father did, you could have worked anywhere, roamed the world even!”
“As you wish, saheb” responded Dhuni Chand politely “but perhaps it would be better if you spent the same money on buying him a car instead: it might be of more utility”.

Manohar Lal was not surprised, he had noticed many times before this tendency of the not-so-well-to-do to choose instant gratification over long term benefit. He said patiently “I understand that’s what you and he want right now, but think of what can be ten years from now. With the right education, he can buy two or four cars of his own. You see the difference between your family and my family, it can all be erased! I want the best of the world for your son, just as I want the best of the world for my son.” Dhuni Chand’s tone remained respectful: “Saheb, the difference between your family and my family, between big people and small people, is mode of transport, whether I’m going around on a cycle or in a car.”
Manohar Lal was dismissive: “You don’t understand. Bring your son tomorrow and I’ll talk to him, he’ll see sense”.

Manohar Lal reflected on this conversation while being driven home in his car. It galled him that Dhuni Chand could think something so superficial, farcical even, was the reason for the great class divide. And, being a Gandhian at heart, he decided: “I’ll show him, and make him change his mind”.

The next morning, Manohar Lal asked his gardener how much a new cycle would cost, and, handing him the money to purchase one, he took possession of the gardener’s cycle. It was an old fashioned cycle with a high saddle, slim tyres and handlebars curved inward. Manohar Lal had not ridden a cycle since he had been in college, and as he wheeled the cycle outside, he realized that he couldn’t raise his leg high enough to mount it. The gardener, a taciturn and patient man, sensed what was on his employer’s mind: he gently guided the cycle towards the raised pavement and held it steady while Manohar Lal awkwardly climbed on and set his foot on a pedal. With a little shove from the gardener and a couple of tremendous wobbles that he barely managed to correct, Manohar Lal was off to work. His driver, who had been amusedly watching the proceedings, scrambled into the car and began following him.

Once he had gotten a hang of it, Manohar Lal started enjoying cycling: the openness that he was surrounded by, the air on his face, the shshsh noise of the simple machinery when he paused his pedaling to coast. It was only when he exited the internal roads of the Sector he lived in and approached the entry to the main road that he realized he had a problem: he wasn’t sure whether he’d be able to safely stop if he needed to, and even if he managed that, how would he get started again? Had he known that his car was just a few metres behind, it’s possible that Manohar Lal’s experiment would have ended here, but as it was he remained ignorant, and his momentum carried him onto the main road. Fortunately, the first roundabout he encountered was devoid of traffic, and he felt exhilaration as he settled into the long straight cycle lane that lay beyond, legs pumping and body swaying slightly left to right. He caused his driver quite a scare as he passed through the next roundabout apparently oblivious of the honking traffic, and coasted off the road into the market where his store was. As he approached the store, a few minutes later than his usual time of arrival, he grinned at his astonished staff, pulling up to an ungainly halt in front of the store and dropping his cycle before he managed to extricate himself and put it on its stand. His legs were trembling, he felt sweaty and looked flushed, but he had never opened his store in as cheerful a mood as he was in that day. As he was assuaging his thirst, he noticed his car parked outside; he walked out and told his driver “You can go home now, I won’t be needing the car today”.

His mood remained upbeat through the day and he often found himself wondering about how his ride home would be. When business was slow in the afternoon, he took the cycle to the vacant parking lot behind the market to practice mounting and dismounting in the smooth manner that he had observed in other cyclists. He was having a tough time, not wholly because of the boisterous group of urchins who had gathered around, until Dhuni Chand arrived at his rescue. Dhuni Chand knew his employer was trying to prove a point to him, but he also felt a lot of goodwill towards the man for all the kindnesses he had received, and been witness to, over the years. And so he chased the young urchins away, and taught Manohar Lal the technique of positioning the pedal such that standing on it would both set the cycle in motion and boost him to his seat. As Manohar Lal became comfortable starting off on the cycle, he simultaneously discovered that stopping the cycle was a mere matter of timing his hop off the seat to coincide with the last instant of braking. 

They returned to the store a half hour later, Manohar Lal wheeling the cycle, feeling a sense of kinship beyond words. Dhuni Chand remained silent until the cycle was put on its stand, and then said “Saheb, my son is busy this week, but he’ll come next week. If you think it’s right, can you advise him on what he should study further?” He understood that his employer’s heart was set on funding his child’s education, and who was he to rail against the forces of fate and destiny, especially when it was good fortune? Manohar Lal’s chest swelled, and he patted Dhuni Chand on the shoulders saying “Bring him anytime, I’m happy I can be of help”.

As the weeks and years passed, Manohar Lal became accustomed to his cycle and stopped using his car altogether. The physical discomfort, stiffness and soreness he’d experienced the first few days disappeared like it had never existed, and he felt everyday the sense of pride that comes of physical endurance, with accomplishing something out of the ordinary. He loved what it felt like: the absolute control over where he was going, the singing in his ears, the hard road floating by in a blur below, the reality of danger lurking behind a mistake. 
His appetite was keener, his sleep unbroken and restful, he laughed more and easier. When he went on longer rides, he enjoyed observing things that he had never known about the city he had lived his entire life in: how each road and circle had different trees and plants, the policemen hiding behind the trees waiting for an unsuspecting car to break a traffic rule, the conversations of the beggars as they plied their trade amidst the stopped cars. He enjoyed most the silent camaraderie that existed among all cyclists, each with their own rhythm, watching patiently the swiftly flowing stream of traffic for that break in which to impose a breach.

<p align="center">
 --x--
</p>

Manohar Lal’s son Dhruv joined the business soon after he graduated from university. Unlike Dhuni Chand’s son Tejas, who had also graduated from the same university the previous year and was now employed at a multinational company, Dhruv was not offered a job during his university’s placement process, but then he had always known that the family business was his to return to. The two young men were good friends despite (or perhaps because of) their different temperaments: one vivacious and quick-witted, the other indrawn and sullen unless engaged in pursuit of his ornithological passions. This reflected in their work: Tejas proceeded rapidly up the corporate ranks, and Dhruv was content sitting behind the counter with his laptop and notebooks, letting operations flow as per the systems his father had created and sustained. 

Manohar Lal lost his wife and Dhuni Chand in the same year, within a few months of each other. He’d cycled to both their funerals, cutting across a large park. Seeing the flowers, some in bloom, some wilting, he was struck by the old truth that a life is ephemeral, and now all he wanted was to savour the peace and quiet that he felt while cycling.  

He started spending less and less time in the store, letting the responsibility of running the store fall to his son. But Dhruv had not the customer friendly acumen of his father, and the business started losing money. Matters were not helped by the steady rise of the online retail industry, and Dhruv realised that they would soon have to let their employees go. He decided to ask Tejas for help, who saw in Dhruv’s appeal an opportunity for enterprise. Quitting his job, Tejas returned to Chandigarh to recreate the business as a supply and logistics operation that focused only on online sales. 

Manohar Lal had noticed the business dwindling and was proud when Tejas returned to join it. He trusted him completely and signed all the necessary papers, thereby securing the loans required with a mortgage of his property. Within a few weeks, the supermarket was shut down and it became a warehouse storing large quantities of stock with a fleet of small trucks for dispatch. It took less than a year for the new business to establish itself and growth was rapid, owing mostly to Tejas’ industry and in part to his connections from his old job. Dhruv relocated to Kutch to oversee import-export exchanges in the ports; he was delighted for the birdwatching heaven accorded by the Rann, and in time was to fall in love with and marry a local belle. Manohar Lal missed him, yet remained enmeshed in his cyclical explorations of his city: this day a garden or a market, a museum or stadium the next. He still visited daily the market where his father had set up a grocery shop. He’d chat with a few acquaintances, visit the bank or post office, read the newspaper at the tea shop under the ficus tree. Sometimes he’d drop by his old place of work to meet Tejas, who always found some time for him, but this grew more rare as Tejas’ travels increased. During his wanderings, Manohar Lal found himself enamoured, or was it haunted, by a chance encounter with a Sardarji at the Tribune Chowk: the man had cycled from Amritsar and, having received the directions he sought for Nada Sahib, proceeded to slowly circle the roundabout a few times, unable to ascertain which of the exits was the one he’d been directed towards, finally shrugging his shoulders and smiling broadly as he heavy-pedalled a random way out.

<p align="center">
 --x--
</p>

Unbeknownst to all concerned, the behemoth company that had employed Tejas, perhaps feeling threatened by what they considered a potentially dangerous incursion into their Indian profits, had instigated a governmental investigation into the operations being run from what had until recently been a supermarket. Tejas only became aware of the trouble he might be in on the afternoon that officials raided the premises, impounded the vehicles and detained him and the other employees for questioning. 

With trembling hands and leaden innards he was attempting to explain to the investigating inspector the financial background of the business. Almost as if on cue Manohar Lal cycled up to the store, knowing from the milling policemen he saw on his approach to the market that something was wrong.  He was stopped at the door by the second-in-command, who, having been in charge of target surveillance in the preceding weeks, recognized Manohar Lal as a market-dawdler and crudely dismissed him: “Go away loafer, there’s nothing here for you today, everybody’s busy.” Manohar Lal persisted, for Tejas’ anxiety was palpable: “What’s happening here? I’m sure I can help. That boy is like my son..” The inspector looked over his shoulder at the intrusion and grunted “Who’s this?” Tejas explained “This is Manohar Lal. He’s a promoter of the company.” The inspector looked coldly at Tejas “I wasn’t asking you”, and turned towards the door. “This man hangs around the market for a couple of hours every day, comes and goes on his cycle. Goes into different shops and chats, came in here too once or twice and spoke for five or ten minutes with him” the second-in-command indicated Tejas with his elbow. 

The world weary inspector sighed as he got up, feeling sad for the shallowness of deception employed in what he deemed an up-and-coming money laundering ruse. He walked to Manohar Lal (the second-in-command melting backwards, for he knew from experience what was coming) and gave him a resounding open palm slap. “This is what I think of your promoters” he said to Tejas, walking back, barking over his shoulder to his second-in-command “Get him out of here”. He sat down, took a deep breath, and calmly continued his interrogation of Tejas: “Please don’t get me angry again, it really upsets me. Now tell me truly, where is all your money coming from?”

Manohal Lal had slumped against the doorway, ears ringing and tears welling up. He wanted to get involved, but the second-in-command took him roughly by the elbow and pushed him towards his cycle. He started to protest, and felt the eyes of the market on him. His cheek and ear felt like they were on fire. The second-in-command spat at his feet and walked back into the store. Manohar Lal’s head and shoulders dropped, he felt a sinking behind his navel and a deep void above; he knew he had been dismissed, that there was no space for him here anymore, nothing for him to do. He wiped his tears with his shoulders as he turned his cycle around to mount it, his vision blurry as he rode away in a daze. 

His mind began to clear as his heart and lungs found familiar union in the cycle’s motion. The air felt cold on his face as his tears dried; his cheek throbbed and he felt an aching hollow in his chest. He thought of Dhruv, and closed his eyes as he visualised his face, feeling glad that he was absent.  He thought of his father, and the apocryphal legend that he had once destroyed a corrupt policeman’s ‘unbreakable’ Hercules cycle by placing it under a train. He thought of destiny, veiled beauty, and how his life had changed since that conversation with Dhuni Chand, how he was no longer seen as a businessman because he was a cyclist. He thought again of the numbness within, and wondered what he could do to help Tejas. A lawyer, he decided, would know exactly what to do, and lo and behold, his cycle had already brought him close to the chambers of an old customer with an established practice! He was courteously received, his briefing drew quick reaction, and he left feeling reassured that Tejas was not in too much trouble.
 
As he cycled away, he thought again of that fateful conversation; he chuckled recalling what Dhuni Chand had wanted: yes, it might indeed have turned out better had he bought Tejas a car instead. But then, would he ever have realized this freedom to roam? Manohar Lal’s heart lightened, and then soared as he pedalled into a roundabout. He circled once, thinking about the Sardarji, and took a random exit en-route to Kutch.

It didn’t take long for the courts to dismiss, with costs, all state actions against Tejas. The inspector had perhaps forgotten that supermarkets, as a matter of course, have security cameras, and footage of his interview with Manohar Lal, majority shareholder of the enterprise, became incontrovertible evidence that the investigation was mala fide and motivated solely by an intent to harass profitable businesses.

